
Creativity as a way of solving wicked problems

contents
1 research into creativity
1a psychological research into the nature of creativity
1b history of creativity
1c pholosophy and creativity

2 what creativity is and is not

3 wicked problems, what makes the urgent and what makes them wicked

4 why creativity could succeed where other efforts at solving wicked problems have failed

5 exercises for making us more creative

6 developing a truly creative perspective - attitudes to authority, to science, to "the canon", to popular opinion, and to discursive frameworks

section 2 what creativity is and is not

sub section b what creativity is not
The difference between creativity and technique is one that the ancient Greeks found familiar, but is one with which we are far less familiar today. We tend to think of creativity as the envisioning of 
something new followed by the process of making something in the world that increasingly corresponds to or even eventually surpasses what is contained within that origial idea. 
I want to make the case that it is far more useful to separate the formulation of the original idea and the bringing into being of that idea. Both are an essential part of how humans must act within the 
world if we are to build solutions to its wicked problems, yet each requires different skills that need not be compatible.This is far closer to the notion that Plato's contemporaries would have 
recognised - that we form an idea, and once this formulation is complete our creative work ("poesis") is done. What remains is simply "mimesis", the copying of that idea into the world (much as a 3D 
printer "copies" what is envisioned in the files it runs). This mimesis, or copying, is achieved through "techne", that is, through skilful endeavour. But however skilful that endeavour may be, it is not 
part of the creative process.
Where we must qualify this is by accounting for teh importance of iteration. It is often only through the making real of an idea that we see how it behaves. Sometimes we see that it does not behave as we 
expect, other times we see further possibilities for it through observation of its behaviour. In both cases we retrn to and rebuild the idea. This rebuilding is part of the creative process. Iterative 
feedback from the instantaition of the idea in the world was necessary to allowing this creative expansion, but ws not itself part of it.


section 4 why creativity could succeed where other efforts at solving wicked problems have not
We are often taught that the greatest virtue is persistence, and that solving the hardest problems is a case of working on them for longer, but what makes a problem wicked is rarely as it were the amount 
of operations that need to be performed upon it for it to be solved. It is true that one part of wickedness may be that one does not know whether this is is where the wickedness lies so that there is 
often the fear of giving up just before the crucial moment. Where this is the case, though, the best protection against stopping when what was needed was to continue or continuing when what was needed 
was to stop is to have a conceptual framework that allows one to understand the effects of long-term operation and to relate their direction of travel to various possible roadmaps one of which may lead 
to success. It is only in cases where the effect of innumerable operations remains hidden, as in some non-linear cases, that such mappings would leave us little the wiser. In all other cases it is the 
creation of those pathways against which we map that was more a part of solving the problem than the continued operation that provided the data to compare to the pathways - this is a largepart of what we 
mean when we say that creativity lies n the  generation and understanding of the idea and how it will be tested not in the techniques that perform these tests.
